---
translation_of: херлберт-сетка
lang: en
---

I learned about the book through becoming familiar with the work of Mikhail Anikst. He designed the book and wrote the commentary.
The book is a good introduction to the history of the typographic grid.
It is divided into three chapters: newspaper, magazine, book. Lots of examples.
I read it as a PDF, but the print version of the book also includes transparent sheets with the grids themselves. 100 pages, a quick read.

## Key points:

1. At the heart of any modular method of design lies a clear understanding of communication problems — from its purpose to the possible reaction of readers. The artist must be aware of and take into account such objective conditions of work on a project as the place and time of publication, as well as the inevitable expenses.
2. Before beginning serious design work, the artist must carefully weigh the actual requirements: the nature of the visual material and its quantity, the order and duration of execution optimal for realizing the concept, and the degree of expressiveness necessary to reveal each element. It is not simply the number of words and images, but the degree of expressiveness given to them that will ultimately determine the quality of visual communication.
3. The next step in the design process will be to link all the factors together to create a unified project concept. It is at this stage that the idea of using a grid most often occurs to the artist, although it may occur at the very beginning or at the very end of the work. One thing is clear in any case: grids and modular systems should serve the concept, not lead it. When the grid dominates the creative process, there is a real danger that it will begin to impose a particular solution.
4. When beginning to design the grid, the artist seeks to give its structure the simplicity they were looking for when creating the overall concept. Grid variations can be very different. A grid may simply define margins and typesetting format, or it may serve as the basis of a complex structure making extensive use of typographic means and visual possibilities. The merits of a grid should be judged by the quality of the resulting design, not by the complexity of the grid pattern.

Like any other design method, the grid is not an absolute. It should be used unobtrusively, modified where necessary, and one should be ready to abandon it altogether for the sake of the best result. In general, an artist who has not worked with grids before would do well to begin with their simplest form. But one should never choose a framework for the work that contradicts one’s idea of the future layout or one’s individual style. At the same time, in striving for growth in artistic mastery, one should not be afraid to experiment.

The main advantage of modular grids is that they discipline the inexperienced artist. While teaching the design of printed publications, I discovered that only by dividing and analyzing space can a student arrive at the desired solution.
