---
translation_of: дмитрий-карпов-ux-поведенческое-проектирование
lang: en
---

## Lecture 001. Behavioral Scenarios. Ritual Actions.

There are four main behavioral scenarios:

1. Neutrality—saw it, used the design object, and remained indifferent. When designing, you need to consider why the person was not interested. The scenario should provide answers to the question of why it did not spark interest.
2. Interest
3. Passion—need it as quickly as possible.
4. Negativity. You need to understand what motives and arguments against the product she has

## Lecture 002. Negative Design. Triggers.

Always develop negative design—take the negative experience of using the product into account.

Do not ask why they do not like it—ask about their lives, what matters to them.

Build a list of why people refuse to continue using the product/do not use features, functions.

A person does not want to learn something new.

The Pareto principle—80% old knowledge, technologies, 20% new knowledge, technologies.

## Lecture 003. Psychological Interaction with a Person. Reducing Energy Expenditure.

Design always strives to reduce energy expenditure.

A person quickly gets used to energy conservation.

Any action should take place at the closest amplitude.

There should always be room for an example of good behavior. A person learns from examples.

Design an example of use right away

## Lecture 004. CJM Design.

CJM—designing consumer maps, routes.

Stage 1—description of how they learned about the need, and that several companies on the market fulfill it. What expectations they have of the product.

Stage 2—why the client’s choice should favor us. Forecast of actions and expectations.

Stage 3—how the first experience of getting acquainted can happen.

Stage 4—how the client acts if they are not ready to use our product.

Stage 5—SWOT analysis of our own and competing products. Strengths, weaknesses. Opportunities and threats in the future

Stage 6—How a person will share their positive experience. Which social networks they will use.

## Lecture 005. The Logic of an Interactive System’s Growth Engines.

Dynamic UX factors

1. Retention—work through how the system communicates with a person. There are 5 types of communication
   1. Mentor—the system waits for questions.
   2. Friend—close relationships, can address the person informally, by name.
   3. Caring\mother—lots of pop-up windows, tutors, and so on. The opposite of a mentor.
   4. Partner—business only.
   5. Merchant—many offers for additional services, upsells
2. Virality
3. Profitability
