---
translation_of: типографика-порядок-и-хаос
lang: en
---

A good overview book on the history of typography. The book is structured around four eras and their key designers. Well illustrated.
[I made](https://geravolobuev.ru/projects/2020-07-15-typo-book-cover) a cover for the book.

Max Bill formulated three basic principles of Swiss typography:

1. Development of a modular wall for any graphic project
2. Use of a sans serif as the typeface for setting text
3. Compositional asymmetry

> “The more precise and complete the chosen criterion, the more creative the work becomes. Creative actions narrow down to the act of choice.”

— Karl Gerstner

> “The first thing that fascinates me about functionalism is its spirituality. My
> guiding principle is based on the idea that any design must contain an order
> of things in order to provide people with greater clarity. Their spiritual development and
> society’s rise to new levels are served by this form of normality—this is
> the strictly businesslike simplicity of functionalism.”

— Wim Crouwel

> “I am a functionalist, and have had too much trouble with aesthetics.”

> “Experimental typography and functional typography are, to some degree, opponents of one another. Experimental typography does not so much reflect a cultural cross-section of its time or become a model, but is, above all, the designer’s self-expression.”

— Helmut Schmid

Weingart’s explorations, undertaken with the goal of restoring expression, gave rise to “new wave” typography. He always believed that designers should know the technologies they use in their work.

Weingart asked his students to look for new principles of typography that would not rely on any systematic approach, but would correspond to the proposed printing production processes.

He wanted to see typography as only part of the graphic designer’s range of tools.

Greiman combined images using video recordings, computer data, photographs, and print. At the foundation of this approach, Greiman argues, is an understanding that different layers of information exist.

_“You grasp the surface layer instinctively, it somehow provokes an emotional reaction, but I love the layers that draw you deeper and make you think.”_

April Greiman

Structures such as modular grids in Kunz’s work are intended not to perform their functions, but rather to create a sensory effect. His geometric structures are personified by color and expressive, intuitive placement of text.

_“Our work deals exclusively with formal relationships between visual components instead of being merely a mechanism for ‘clever ideas.’ Idea-based design relegates visual/aesthetic considerations to secondary roles.”_

8VO

“My natural approach to design is intuitive. I try not to think, but to do. I use grids and elements of post-rationalism to understand why I did it, and how it can be improved <…> I am actually a sloppy person. I am completely disorganized. In a way, I use grids to bring order to the chaos going on in my head.”

_“Clarity creates reading comfort instead of a new visual interpretation and stronger communication. Reading should be seductive, inviting, and stimulate the visual and intellectual senses.”_

Bridget Wilkins

In his work he never uses commonplace, ordinary typefaces:

_“Type design is emotional. I finish the creative process of developing a typeface only when it helps convey the thoughts and feelings that I want to communicate to the viewer.”_

Max Kisman

_“I shape my style by using my own typefaces in my posters, which reveal my own feelings. I always want to make posters using only those visual elements that contain as much as possible of my own thoughts and feelings in visual identification.”_

_“I tried to evaluate the core of the idea under consideration: what was being done and why. From it I took only the feeling of dynamism, the feeling of humanism, and the rejection of traditional rules and values.”_

Neville Brody

_“In order to start creating, I need a blank screen—no layout, no rules. I cannot work with any templates on the computer—the first thing I do is delete them. I need to get rid of all of this before I begin working. This may come from a lack of education—I never studied what a grid is. When I learned about it, I had already worked for several years and saw no place for it in my work.”_

David Carson

“When I create a design, I read the article and try to interpret it so that the design gives it more life, more emotion, more emphasis. I try to interest readers visually.”

_“I think that design arising from style is less profound than design arising from content. Ten years ago everyone imitated Brody, now Carton. The techniques are recognizable from three meters away. Designers who, like Tibor Kalman, work from content produce stronger results; you can compete with them only by finding an equally significant idea.”_

Stefan Sagmeister

The postmodern quoting of art from the past is, in essence, not a return to tradition, since only external signs are reproduced, while the historical reinterpretation of the past is lost.

Postmodernism is oriented toward a consumer society in which the emphasis shifts toward design for entertainment and pleasure.

Now the designer does not look for that single option or visual form, but instead uses eclectically hybrid images, mixes typographic styles, and delights in deliberately complicated composition.

A designer who stoops to the simple “artistic” decoration of a project is amusing at best, but their work will never have real significance for the future development of graphic design. These fantasies will pass together with the postmodern paradigm, disappearing under the pressure of reality’s harsh laws. They have no future. Under the conditions of fierce competition, victory belongs to simplicity and concision.
