---
translation_of: дизайн-для-реального-мира-виктор-папанек
lang: en
---

*All people are designers. Almost everything we do is design, since designing is inherent to humans in any activity.*
*Design is the conscious and intuitive effort to create meaningful order.*
*The main idea of this book is design for human needs, not wants*

Papanek is, of course, an “authoritative thief.” He traveled around the world a lot and saw a lot with his own eyes.
For most of the book, the author shits on (not without reason) and exposes the existing trends in design, the education system, the industrial conglomerate, and so on. But, like a decent person, he always offers alternatives.

*Industry indulged society’s desire for everything new and unprecedented. The combination of technology and the artificial stimulation of consumer whims spawned sinister twins: modernization and obsolescence. There are three types of obsolescence: technological (discovers a new or more elegant way of doing things), material (a thing wears out), and artificial (a thing is deliberately doomed to an early death; either the material is nonstandard and will wear out within a predictable period of time, or its main parts cannot be replaced or repaired).*

He held such views throughout his life. Naturally, designers who were raking in cash from such things did not like him very much.
If you consider the twenties and thirties, Bauhaus, and Le Corbusier the pinnacle of design practice, Papanek tears them apart too:

*The concept that everything _functional_ is necessarily _beautiful_ served as a clumsy excuse for the sterile, operating-room-like furniture and utensils of the twenties and thirties… Le Corbusier’s “Machine for Living” house and the houses resembling packing crates proposed by the Dutch De Stijl movement reflect a distorted understanding of both aesthetics and utility.*

Although the book mostly consists of the author’s reflections on sore subjects and stories about projects, there are also chapters examining various creative techniques.

1. Brainstorming
2. Synectics
3. Morphological analysis
4. Moving columns
5. Bisociation
6. Trisociation
7. Bionics and biomechanics
8. Awakening new ways of thinking

Papanek describes an approach to design as a functional complex of six parts:

**Method:** The interaction of _tools, processes,_ and _technologies._

*A good method is the honest use of materials, without trying to pass a material off as something it is not. Materials and tools should be used optimally: one material should never be used if another can do the job at a lower cost and/or more efficiently.*

**Use:** “Is it functional?

*A vitamin bottle should dispense pills one at a time. An inkwell should not tip over. The cellophane package in which slices of pastrami∗ are stored should withstand boiling water but open easily.*

**Need:**
*Modern design largely satisfied only fleeting wants, while genuine human needs often remained ignored. Rapidly accelerating changes in technology were exploited to create the phenomenon of technological obsolescence.*

**Telesis:**
*The deliberate, purposeful use of processes in nature and society to achieve specific goals” (Random House Dictionary, 1978). The telesic content of design should reflect the time and conditions that produced it and correspond to the universal socioeconomic order in which it will operate.*

**Associations:**
*Our psychological conditioning, often referring back to our earliest childhood memories, plays its part and influences our fondness for or aversion to certain values.*

*Most associative values are universal within a particular culture and are often based on that culture’s traditions. These values are determined by unconscious, deeply rooted aspirations and impulses. There is an unconscious connection between the viewer’s expectations and an object’s configuration. A designer can manipulate this connection. It can emphasize the “chairness” of a chair while simultaneously loading it with associative sensations of elegance, formality, portability, impeccably finished wood, and so on.*

**Aesthetics:** This is the traditional refuge of the bohemian artist.

*Aesthetics is a tool, one of the most important tools in a designer’s creative work; a tool that helps create from forms and colors real objects that affect us, please us, seem beautiful, exciting, attractive, and significant to us.*

And a couple of good quotes to finish:

On the difference of industrial design:
*Industrial design differs from the related arts of architecture and engineering. While architects and engineers usually solve existing problems, industrial designers are often hired to propose new problems.*

*Moving coins around on a table is an act of design in miniature, because design is the activity of solving a problem that, by definition, can never have a single correct solution: the result is always an infinite number of solutions, some of them “more correct” and some “less correct
Correctness” will depend on the meaning we put into the process of moving them.*

*With the emergence of new techniques and an endless list of new materials, the artist, craftsperson, and designer have now begun to suffer from the tyranny of absolute choice. When everything becomes possible, when there are no constraints, design and art can easily turn into a ceaseless search for novelty until novelty-for-novelty’s-sake becomes the only goal.*

*Whether we want it or not, the modern artist lives in modern society. It is now unclear whether machines surround people or people surround machines.*

*Any design is a kind of education. The designer tries to educate their client-manufacturer and the people in the market. After all, in most cases the designer is assigned the role (or, even more often, assigns themself the role) of producing “toys for adults” and a whole medley of shiny, sparkling, useless technical novelties, and in this situation the question of responsibility becomes complicated.*

*The designer’s most important ability is the ability to recognize, identify, define, and solve problems. In my view, the main thing in design is to sense the meaning of problems, to be their “discoverer,” to be able to define problems that have not yet been recognized or identified, and to figure out how to solve them.*

*For design to be ecologically responsible and socially responsive, it must be revolutionary and radical in the most literal sense. It must follow nature’s principle of least effort—in other words, create maximum diversity with minimum means (in Peter Pearce’s witty phrase), or achieve maximum results with minimum means. This means consuming less, using things longer, and practicing economy when reusing materials.*
