---
translation_of: школа-дизайна-яндекс-конспекты
lang: en
---

### Lecture 001 notes.

**Important skills:**

1. Ability to see the whole picture
2. Reduce the degree of uncertainty
3. critical attitude toward the result of the work

There are no “gold standards” for product design.

Companies can conventionally be divided into: \

- Design companies—Powerfully communicate a vision of how things should be.
- Commerce—Make money.
- Technology companies—Make something that is very difficult to replicate.

Design in a technology company is “deaf” to beauty for beauty’s sake.

### Lecture 002 notes.

A brand is a feeling.

Four properties:

1. Universality.
2. Openness. Simplicity and clarity. Speaking the same language as the user.
3. Technological sophistication. Being able to explain technology “on your fingers”
4. Unity. Consistency of products and their unity in the general context.

A brand should be viewed from the client’s perspective.

If a symbol can be left unused, it is better not to use it.

### Lecture 003 notes.

Visual language is a set of expressive means that shape the appearance of a product.

Contrast is the difference between characteristics. One of the characteristics should provide the contrast.

An accent is a particular case of contrast. The principle of spots. The zebra principle is the optimal alternation of background and outline.

Grids: “First you need to make it good, and only then deal with the grid.” \
The grid depends on the tasks of the specific service.

A pictogram is a sign displaying the most important recognizable features of an object, item, or phenomenon. Understandable. Like road signs. Scalable. Distinguishable. Concise. Without decoration. Consistent.

Icons, signs \
A sign should be interesting. \
Basic shapes—a circle, square, rectangle, triangle. Distinguishable. \
They do not get lost when there is only one of them. \
“Toy-like” shapes appear from large corner roundings and incorrect proportions.

Animation \
Micro-animation—helps perception, provides feedback, adds life. \
Macro-animation—draw attention to something, advertise it.

Imperative moods come from helplessness. A minimum of foreign words. Brief—lively—clear.

### Lecture 004 notes

The company’s history, its values, and growth points are reference points for design planning.

You should not stew in your own juice. Ideas often come from outside. \
Constant feedback is very important.

A designer’s job is solving an equation. Defining the unknowns. The unknowns are:

- Brand (B)
- Visual Language (L)
- Functionality (F)

Why you cannot change everything at once:

- An amorphous structure disperses attention
- If something goes wrong, it is difficult to find the cause

### Lecture 006 notes

The idea determines the design. The idea is already the design. It is what needs to be sold.

A presentation is a way to preserve the idea.

Find out the initial idea.

Involve the client in the process.

Scenario for the development of events in a presentation:

1. Exposition
2. Inciting incident
3. Vicissitudes
4. Climax
5. Resolution

### Lecture 007 notes

You cannot simply take everything and redo it. \
Do not demolish and build from scratch, but analyze, decompose, correct, and expand.

A great many people need to be convinced that what you propose is right.

Design skills:

- Understand the existing style
- Draw beautiful pictures
- Design interfaces
- Come up with something cool, generate ideas
- **Bring solutions through to implementation**

Product designer skills:

- Understand where and why everything is moving
- Research all possible solutions
- Prototype
- Justify the decisions made
- Be responsible for the development of some part of the product

A mission is the answer to the question of why a company exists (besides making money).

### Lecture 008 and 009 notes

A prototype is a quick, simplified version of the future implementation of a system. \
The first version of a product.

It is needed to:

- Sell the idea
- Explain the logic
- Test behavior
- Interface usability
- Try the product on yourself
- Try the product on others
- Live with the product

Cycle: \
CREATE > SHOW > UNDERSTAND

The first stage is defining the task. The question “why.” \
A person does not need the solution in itself.

_Application workflow scenario_: problem-action-solution to the problem

A sketch solution is a set of screens that makes it possible to show how the problem can be solved.

### Lecture 011 notes

A product solves a problem, rather than meeting a need or providing an opportunity.

**Idea**—a mental prototype of some object, phenomenon, or principle that highlights its principal traits, main and essential traits.

**Concept**—the next step after an idea. A complex of views connected with one another and following one from another, a system of ways to solve the selected task.

**Prototype**—a quick rough basic implementation of functionality for analyzing how it works.

**Product**—a solution possessing material or nonmaterial value for the consumer.

**Value**—the consumer’s assessment of a product’s ability to satisfy their needs, expressed as advantage, benefit, and good.

**Project**—This is a time-limited process that transfers an idea from the sphere of representations into the sphere of reality.

Three roles in successful teams:

1. Genius
2. Techie
3. Hustler

At Yandex there are two phases in the process of working on a product: \

- Invention and Development (here the phase of uncertainty is not so large).

Always, at every stage, you need to test your product. \
Mark the “milestones” in the product’s design. Do not throw versions away.

### Lecture 012 notes

How do you understand whether an idea is “viable”?

An idea can be: \

- Organic: It was born on its own. Imperfection all around.
- On demand: There is a client.

Two approaches to generating ideas: \

- Analytical: Business. Past. Less risky.
- Synthesizing: Design. Future. Risky.

**If you ask people what their problem is, they will talk about symptoms.**

Testing an idea:

- Studying the industry
- Competitor analysis
- Experts
- Testing the idea. Interview

As a result, answer the questions:

- Who tried to solve it and what was wrong
- This is not only your problem
- Brief description of the problem
- Who it is for
- They are willing to pay for it

Consumer profile:

- Jobs
- Pains
- Gains

Jobs and pains can be:

- Functional
- Social
- Emotional

The more “pains” there are and the more clearly they are formulated, the better.

Gains:

- Required
- Expected
- Desired
- Unexpected

### Lecture 013 notes

**To find a good idea, first of all you need to find many ideas.**

Hypothesis template:

- It seems that this will work like this
- To test this, we will do this
- And we will measure this metric
- We are right if the metric behaves like this

**Product composition**

Gain creators \
Pain relievers \
Products and services:

- Physical, material
- Intangible—Digital
- Financial

Algorithm for working on the product composition:

1. Make a list of products and services
2. Make a list of pain relievers
3. Make a list of gain creators
4. Sort the items in the lists by importance

“Product—> Market” tests:

- What product composition is valuable to you?
- What should we retain, and what should we abandon?
- Has anything important been lost?
- What seems secondary?
- What would you add?
- What would you remove?

MVP is the minimum version of a product based on the product’s main, unique features.

### Lecture 014 notes

User experience design (UX)

“_User Experience—all aspects of the end user’s interaction with the company, its services, and its products._” \
Donald Norman

“_Interaction design is a description of possible user behavior and a definition of how the system will respond to their behavior and adapt to it._” \
Jesse Garrett

**The first question when working with UX is: Who uses our product?**

A persona is a person, their goals, expectations, motivations, and behavior. \
Personas use a product for different reasons.

Three main behavior models:

- Search. When you design for the search behavior model, the user should find what they want as quickly as possible.
- Browsing. No goal has been formed. They are exploring. The main thing is to make the product inspiring. Look & Fill is determining.
- Discovery.

Persona description template:

- PERSONA persona name
- Uses our product because persona motivation
- At the moment when and where
- And expects persona goal

An interaction scenario describes one possible path that the user takes to achieve their goal.

Scenario description template:

- SCENARIO problem description
- entry-point description
- action description
- action description
- action description
- output result description

### Lecture 015 notes

Ways to test solutions.

The main task of testing is to reduce risk and the level of uncertainty.

Principles:

1. Evidence is more valuable than opinions.
2. Experiment more often.
3. Details are not important at the start.
4. Experiments are not reality.
5. Preserve the “vision.”
6. Know what can destroy your idea. Know the main features.
7. First of all, understand your consumer.
8. Ensure measurability.
9. Not all facts are equally equal.
10. Test irreversible decisions twice.

Hypothesis test:

- WE THOUGHT THAT it would be like this
- WE DISCOVERED this change in the metric
- IT TURNS OUT THAT in reality it is like this
- THEREFORE WE will act like this

### Lecture 016–017 notes

**Implementation of the solution**

**The main goal is to launch as quickly as possible.** \
A deadline is good. **Design without deadlines does not exist.** \
The designer is the chief architect of the experience of interacting with the product. \
Speak in understandable language. Understand whom you are talking to. \
Make people into collaborators.

**Communications**

Communication is not advertising. \
Communication = audience+channel+message (to whom, where, and what we say) \
Business metrics are the drivers of money. \
It is important to be consistent in all communications.

### Lecture 018–019 notes

What a designer should be good at:

1. Integrity
2. Sensitivity
3. Non-stereotypical thinking
4. Visualization
5. Practical orientation
6. Ability to inspire

A raw idea—whom, why, and what I can offer \
A way to describe a raw idea:

- Fill in the “Problem-solution” template
- Fill in the product positioning template
- Describe the essence of the invention

A way to understand consumers:

- Describe the segments
- Compile questionnaires and select respondents
- Design and conduct interviews
- Compile user profiles

Pitch deck composition:

1. Welcome—who you are and why you are here
2. Problem—what the problem is
3. Solution—what your solution is and what makes it unique
4. Market validation—whether demand exists
5. Market size—How large-scale the problem you describe is

The team should be complementary. \
**“If two people think alike, one of them is unnecessary.”**

### Lecture 020–023 notes

**How to set tasks correctly:**

- What is the real meaning of the task?
- Why are we doing this?
- What effect do we want to achieve?
- How will we understand that the proposed solution is good?
- How will we measure the result?

Even before doing anything in earnest, it is worth discussing the first ideas about solving the task aloud with colleagues.

By the time of actual acceptance, the task should in fact already have been delivered. Then acceptance is just a formality that decides nothing fundamental.

Handling objections:

- Understand your position (and be ready to defend it)
- separate the constructive part
- do not become defensive, ask questions
- record everything for subsequent correction

Every objection is a new mini-task.

It is impossible to manage time, but you can manage your energy.

Meetings:

Do not agree to a meeting if:

- The meeting is spontaneous
- Someone is late
- One of the interested parties is missing
- There is no task in the task manager or email
