---
translation_of: команда-курс
lang: en
---

## LECTURE 1

### THE RIGHT PEOPLE AT THE RIGHT TIME IN THE RIGHT PLACE – HOW TO FIGURE IT OUT

Teamwork is the coordinated activity of people.

The first questions concern yourself—what your values, strengths, and shortcomings are.
Next—the company’s goals, the steps, what competencies are needed from people. What exactly the people we hire will do. What experience they have.

With a competency-based interview, you can:

- find out how a person acted in a situation that interests us.
- compare their past experience with the competencies our company needs.

## LECTURE 2

### PRINCIPLES OF A UNITED TEAM – TRUST AND OPENNESS

**Principles of a united team:**

1. Trust
2. Discuss openly, be ready for conflict
3. Interest in accepting the idea of plans and decisions
4. Responsibility for implementation
5. Focus on achieving goals

Constructive conflict is only about ideas and concepts, not personalities.

The essence of trust is getting to know a person personally.

Try to learn a little at a time about a person’s past, for example about their first job.

## LECTURE 3

### PRINCIPLES OF A UNITED TEAM – RESPONSIBILITY

Responsibility is voluntary motivation.

Decisions. Only Decisions.

What regular practices help the team achieve clarity:

- Summing up results and interim
- Setting clear deadlines and monitoring their execution
- Analyzing likely and bad forecasts

## LECTURE 4

### PRINCIPLES OF A UNITED TEAM – DEMANDINGNESS. FEATURES OF FEEDBACK.

High-quality feedback

- is fresh in time
- is based on specific facts
- is neutral in its wording
- appeals to a person’s actions, not their personality

What actions make criticism easier to accept?

- Voicing the values the team relies on
- Pointing out not only an employee’s mistakes, but also their achievements

What risks does a lack of demandingness in a team carry?

- Misalignment within the team
- Employees’ indifference to overall results
- Employees focusing on their own careers and personal bonuses

## LECTURE 5

### PRINCIPLES OF A UNITED TEAM – FOCUS ON RESULTS, HOW TO MAINTAIN IT

The result is not only profit, but also qualitative goals.

The team should know about team goals and understand the importance of personal contribution to team goals.

Constantly remind the group about the goals.

Put gadgets away during discussions.

## LECTURE 6

### TEAM FORMATION MODEL AND STAGES OF DEVELOPMENT

Drexler/Sibbet phases and their questions:

1. Orientation – what am I doing here?
2. Building trust – who are you?
3. Goal clarification – what are we doing?
4. Commitment – how are we doing it?
5. Role allocation – who, how, what, when?
6. High performance
7. Renewal – why continue?
